We have one more time in Spanish to learn, one more verb time, and that's the point in the past.
The one that usually we would express with E D in English, wanted, walked, or you know, the irregular versions, ran, eight
This is the point in the past and it's much more random than the other tenses that we looked at.
The point in the past.
is a little bit more messy.
But we will find some logic in it.
Just not the same one that we've been seeing until now.
So we will practice with ablar for our verbs and with kommer for er-ir verbs and we will use these verbs as our hooks that we can look back to when we need to remember one of these endings.
So I spoke.
I spoke is able.
Able.
Can you tell me what I did there then to get I spoke from to speak from ablar
You took off the AR ending and added an A.
Good.
Anything else?
Well the accent is on the A.
Perfect.
Able.
Good.
So that's I spoke.
And he, she, it, or you formal spoke
Is a bloh a bloh a blood and what did I do there?
To get a blo from a blah
You took off the AR and you put an O.
Okay.
And the accent is on the O.
Good.
So remember when we said how important the accent was in the present?
Because if you stress Ablo, I speak
If you stress it wrong, we said that we all get this version in the past.
Abloh, he, she, it, and you formul spoke.
What was I didn't speak?
No abla.
Sorry, no able.
No able.
And that might happen to you often, huh?
Because we have such a strong connection between O and I.
But in this point in the past it's eh.
No able.
And he didn't speak or she didn't speak or you formally didn't speak.
No ablah.
No abla.
Good.
What was to buy?
Comprer, comprar.
Good.
Comprar.
So if you come up with comprir, for example, and it doesn't feel right, you can just run a little check and change the ending.
Comprar, comprar, comprar and the one that you heard before is going to be the one that jumps out at you.
Comprar.
So how would you say I bought?
Compre.
Compre and I bought it.
Lo Compre.
I didn't buy it.
Nolo compra.
Good, no lo compra.
He bought it.
Lo compro.
He bought it for me
Melo compro.
Good.
We don't need the four.
Very good.
Melo compro.
We could use the four if we wanted.
If we wanted to emphasize or stress that it's for me.
So how would that be?
Lo compro para mi.
Good.
Lo compro para mí.
To send in Spanish is enviar.
Enviar.
So we have uh envoy from this in English.
Envelope.
Is that from that?
Or is it from envelope?
Like to to encapsulate, you have encapsulate, envelope.
But like I said, we don't need to know when we consider these things.
Just considering it helps us remember that word.
And if you're particularly curious, there are I mean to check
There are some very good online free resources, for example, ethimonline.
com, etymonline.
com is an excellent uh
free etymological dictionary where you can check any word you have a curiosity for.
So M VR to send I sent
Envier.
Exactly.
I sent it.
La envie.
I sent it to you, speaking informally.
Delo Envier.
Good.
I didn't send it to you.
No Delo Envier.
Good.
Not Delo Envier.
The word for still or yet
The same word in Spanish, still oyet, is todavía, todavía.
Todavía.
Which is actually the combinations of toro
Here, toda in feminine, meaning all, and via, like via in English, is a way.
So it's all the way.
But
Of course no Spanish speaker hears that when they hear todavía.
Just like when we say expressions like as well, we don't think that that's built off as and well.
So the words, sometimes the small words we build these bigger words out of, in English and in Spanish, don't make much sense to us most of the time.
But for a learner, it's
useful for you to divide a word like todavia because it's long and you might find it difficult to remember and if you identify that it's toda and via
even if that doesn't really make any sense with the meaning of yet and still, it's gonna help you internalize that vocabulary.
So yet or still
Tolavia Tolavia I didn't send it to you yet.
Still speaking informally
Note lo enviato via.
Good.
What was he sent or she sent or you formal sent?
It sent
Envio.
Good.
Yesterday, the word for yesterday was ayer.
Ayer.
Good.
So how would you say he sent it yesterday
Lo envio ayer.
Good.
He sent it yesterday.
She sent it yesterday.
You form will sent it yesterday.
If you want to say it was sent yesterday, this kind of structure in English where we don't say who did it, we just say it was sent yesterday, how do you think you might say that in Spanish?
Se lo and.
No.
Think first the structure in English.
What you will say in Spanish, but in English.
It sent itself.
Exactly.
So what is it sent?
Envio.
Okay.
It sent itself
Yes, and you're dying to put the law there, right?
So i this is the intuition because you have it sent in your mind.
But if you don't
Succumb to that intuition and you work mechanically, it sent envio.
It sent itself.
Sa envio.
Okay, and then you don't get law because you don't need it.
So it's it sent itself yesterday, it was sent yesterday.
Se envio ayer.
Good.
Again, what was to speak?
Hablar.
Good.
And I spoke
Good, and he spoke.
Able.
He spoke with me
Hablo conmigo.
Good.
I don't know why he didn't speak with me.
So the first bit is I don't know why.
No sé por qué.
He didn't speak with me.
No hablo conmigo.
Good.
To forget is olvidar.
Olvidar.
That means to forget.
And the noun, olvido.
We don't have it in English, I don't think.
the forgetting, el olvido, the process, like the experience of forgetting.
I don't think we have a word like this in English.
And you will hear it a lot in uh songs especially in Spanish, especially tango, if you listen to tangos
They they speak about falling in love and forgetting, not ever falling out of love.
Only el olvido.
Olvidar to forget.
How would you say I forgot?
And he forgot.
I was going to do it, but I forgot it.
I was going to do it, but I forgot it
So the first bit is I was going.
This is your line in the past, and it's one of the three irregular verbs that we have in the line of the past.
Iba.
So I was going to do it.
Lo iba a hacer.
But I forgot it.
Pero lo olvidé.
Good.
Lo iba a hacer, pero lo olvidé.